First, Mr. Ashton, tell us a little bit about your
early life, including the names of your parents,
the places and dates of their birth and death if you
know them, the place and date of your birth, and
schools you attended up to going to college. Well,
I was born in Trouters, Rhode Island, October 17,
1908, on Laurel Hill Avenue, which, to be honest
about it, was a rather slum area. I don't remember
my father and mother very well because they died
when I was quite young, both of them within three
months of each other with pneumonia. My father,
incidentally, was an ice man. Now, that's an
occupation that no longer exists. And I was stuck
in an orphanage. And when I say an orphanage, I
don't mean one likened to these that you have here
in this beautiful state of Texas. This was a
prison. It was one of these places run by charity.
You were awful lucky if you had shoes that matched.
We had secondhand toothbrushes and so forth.
Well, I was taken out of there at the age of nine by
two elderly people up in Massachusetts who didn't
know what a hellion they were getting. They were
very wonderful people. And I went to school in
Massachusetts and finished high school in Medway
High School. And I had already made up my mind. I was
quite an athlete when I was a kid. I'd already made
up my mind four or five years before I finished that
I was going to Brown University in Providence,
Rhode Island. My football coach, incidentally,
was a Brown man. And with my high scholastic
standing and his pull, I got into Brown. I stayed
there a couple of years. And let me tell you, that
place is prohibitive. Even in those days, I
entered Brown in 1926. And it was one of the
costliest schools in America then. I met a fellow
there from Baylor.
And he gave me a big line about Texas. I was about to
run out of money. I had no folks, of course. And he
kept chipping at me and chipping at me. And
finally, I just hopped a train and I came down to
Baylor. The man you met from Baylor, was he a Baylor
graduate who was teaching at Brown? Yes, he was a
Baylor graduate. And he was up there working on an
advanced degree and teaching history at Brown
University. Incidentally, the way we met, I
worked for a detective agency working nights in
Providence, Rhode Island. And I was out on the
street all hours of the night, of course. And he did
a lot of walking. He was very lonesome. And we had to
wear these little brown hats with a white button.
And so I bumped into him several times late at
night. We struck up a little conversation. We
became quite friendly and that's how I landed here
in Texas in 1928. And he had a job for me at Baylor. I
flourished at Baylor. I got a degree at Baylor. And
then I went, I got a job, my first school job was
coaching football. What was your major at Baylor?
I double majored in English and History. Did you
participate in any kind of sports while you were
there? I was ineligible. I was quite a track man in
the East, but I was ineligible as bailiff. I never
could become eligible. You can today, now, after
years of residence. I see. You were ineligible.
But I worked with a track team there. I helped train
the track team with Ralph Wilson. You were
ineligible. Was that because you were an
out-of-state resident? No, because I'd run at
Brown. I see. I participated in another school,
and therefore you were ineligible. That's right.
for the rest of your college. That's right. You had
been, what, two years at Brown? Yes. And then you
did two years at Baylor. Yes.
OK. Then you say you began as a high school coach
after that. Where did you? Not only that, I was not
only the high school coach, but I was the principal
of the grammar school. Where was this? This was in
Lorena, Texas. It's about 15 miles out of Waco on
the way to Austin. For how long did you... Two
years. Two years. And then where did you go? Then I
went to Gorman, Texas as a football coach and
principal of the elementary school. And that,
thank the good Lord, is where I met my wife. Uh-huh.
Now, that one year. And I wrote a little letter up to
Massachusetts just for the fun of it. to my old
superintendent and football coach, and he wrote
back a little note with a contract in it that said,
sign it, we need you up here to teach English. I
signed it, I went up there, stayed a year, came
back, married my wife, we went back, stayed
another 10 years. And on the way down on that last
year, I said to my wife, if I get a job in Texas, would
you like to move back? Well, I'm not gonna tell you
what she said, but she said yes. And I did. How did
you happen to get the job at A&M? Well, that's a
strange thing. I just happened to visit at Baylor.
And the old fellow out there that I love very much, a
fellow named Sparkman, Dr. Sparkman, wonderful
old fellow. I dropped in there to pay him a little
visit. He said, I knew he was in the state. He said,
and I just sent a note down to A&M to Tommy Mayo and
told him that you would be down there to be
interviewed for a job. He said, they need some
English teachers. And I told him, well, Sparky,
I'll go. So I came down. And in five minutes, Tommy
said, you're hired. And Tommy May was a wonderful
fellow. So I have come to understand from a number
of people who I've talked with who were students of
his or talked with him or something. Wonderful
fellow. And you joined the faculty then in 1946?
That's right. As what, an instructor in English?
Instructor in English, and I was out at the
airfield. So you were in the basic division
teaching? No, it wasn't called a basic then. That
was the year when we had that big influx of
veterans, and they were out at the old airfield out
here west of On the way to power. Right. Okay. That
was in 46. That was before the basic division was
created. That's right. Who was out at the annex
then? Well, there were six of us English teachers
out there, and I don't remember. Some basic
courses were taught out there. That's what you
mean. Yes, yes. But the basic division is
something entirely different than that. Now, we
were teaching English 103 and 104 out there, six of
us out there. And then they had, I think, math was
out there. And I don't remember what else was out
there, but I remember Tom Harrington was the
coordinator or dean or whatever. We had a raft of
fellows out there. But it was all freshmen out
there? Yeah. Yes. Where did you live then? Well, I
lived out there in one of those... barracks or
whatever you call it, you know, the ones that
fronted the highway. They weren't down where the
students lived. I guess you'd call them officers'
quarters, I presume. You had an apartment in one of
the buildings then. Yes. Did all the faculty live
in one or two of the buildings? Well, there were
several of those long things, you know. Yes, we all
lived out there. No, some of them lived way down,
further down beyond where the students lived. We
all lived out there at the annex. How long did you
stay out at the annex then? I think it was a couple of
years or a year and a half, and then Tommy called me
into the main campus. You know, I'm not very good at
dates. I can't remember really what happened last
week, so I'm a little hazy on dates. Well, to a
certain extent, specific dates are not that
important. They're not important. When you came
back, when you came to the main campus and after a
couple years out of Gen X, did you continue to teach
primarily freshman courses or did you have more
upperclassmen at that point? No, it wasn't very
long before Dr. Mayo gave me some upper class work
to do, sophomore level work. And he called me in one
day and asked me to teach 319, which is a report
writing course and so forth and so on. So for quite a
few years there I taught several levels.
How did you become director or head of the Aggie
Players? That's a strange question and it's a
stranger answer. I don't know. I just... Tommy
Mayo asked me if I'd take over the Aggie Players and
I said yes. And that was it. Now you will explain
that. Had you had any prior training, experience,
or whatever in theater arts? Oh, yes. Up in
Massachusetts when I was teaching there, I worked
with a stock company for about 10 years. And I did a
great deal of acting. I never had any courses in
college or at the university level in any theater.
I learned quite a bit working with this group
because we had some very special people working.
This was in Medway, Massachusetts. I worked with
the Medway players. And I also became president of
that for a couple of years. It was a stock company.
We made some money, and we gave it away. You know, it
was a non-profit thing. So you had had a good bit of
practical experience. Oh, yes, I had a great deal
of practical experience. What had been the past
history of this organization? Well, it was very
hazy. The Aggie Players itself has a name, came
into existence in 1946. And prior to that, as I say,
back to 1876, student organizations and faculty
organizations on this campus had, under many
different names, endeavored to put on shows,
plays of all kinds and of all descriptions, none of
which lasted very long. They were very
short-lived. That is the organization. Yes. Can
you tell us something about the creation of the
Aggie Players in 1946? No. I wasn't interested in
the Aggie Players in 1946. I was interested, but I
don't know what went on because I didn't have
anything to do with them. I didn't take them over
until 1950. So you were off campus at the time they
were created? No, I was on campus. Well, I mean, but
you were out at the annex. No. Yes, yes, yes, a
couple of years. Yes, yes. So then your first
contact was in 50 when Dr. Mayo asked you to take it
over. That's right. and uh what uh it was under
student activities at that time so it was it was not
under the english department it was uh not the
aggie players no
um There were two courses called English 381 and
382 that had been created by whom I don't know. And
one of them was called play production and the
other one was called stagecraft. And just to be
honest, they were not very good courses. They were
not very good. Those had been in existence
probably a couple of years when I took it over. And I
was assigned those two courses. That was at the
time you became director of the Aggie Players?
Right, yeah. What was the makeup of the Aggie
Players as an organization when you took them
over? Well, as I told you, they all quit when I took
it over. But, I mean, it had been just a kind of a
student social organization that did put on play?
Well, you used the word social. I didn't, but I'll
abide by that. Well, in other words, it was a
student organization. Right. whose purpose was
to put on plays for entertainment. Right. It was
not, say, a function of the English department.
No. However, an English instructor was the
director of the plays.
Then you said you took it over and everybody who was
a member quit. What did you do then? Well, I just
issued a call in the battalion for a cast call to do
the first show. And a few people showed up. Do you
remember what your first show was? Yes, there they
are, right there on the old wall. That's every show
that I've ever done here, right there. The first
show I did was Kind Lady. I forgot who wrote it
now. Now... This may sound like kind of a silly
question, but at the point you took over the Aggie
Players, of course, it was almost entirely an
all-male military school. And obviously, with a
play like Kind Lady, you would have a female
person. Where did you get your females to? There
was never any problem in getting ladies to work
with the Aggie players. We used secretaries, we
used some faculty wives, we had people from town if
they wanted to come out. Any lady in the community
was eligible to join the Aggie players. We never
had any problem in getting ladies. Even though it
was a student organization, non-students quite
regularly belonged to it. Over the years, I've had
several wives of deans, and when Dr. Morgan was
president, his wife was a member of the Aggie Place
and worked in several plays. In fact, she's quite a
brilliant woman. And she wrote quite a few plays,
and I did one of her plays. And she acted in it for me,
with me. She's a brilliant woman.
What would you say would be some of your
outstanding plays that you have done over the
years? Most interesting, most difficult? Well,
probably the two. would be Shakespeare's
Macbeth, which, you know, one does not stir the
bones of Shakespeare. But I studied that with
another gentleman who is now not on the faculty,
but a very brilliant man. And we did a great deal of
study of witchcraft and of that particular
period. And we changed it a little. Now, don't
misunderstand me. I did not touch one single line
of Shakespeare, but we did rearrange some scenes
and we portrayed witches other than had been
previously portrayed. And I prefer not to go into
that now because I don't think you've got that kind
of time. And the other show that I have a great
liking for was Death of a Salesman, which I think is
one of America's great plays of this century.
That's just my personal opinion. But those two
shows, oh, there are many shows that stick out in my
mind that I've done. I've done Oedipus Rex. I like
that, too, by Sarkozy. I did both versions. The
one, you know, with the Greek costume. I did the
modern version by Hanoi. Oh, I don't know. I'd hate
to list the shows. Because I'm in this business, or
I got into this business because I love two things.
I love theater and I like my kids. I mean, my
students. They're wonderful kids here at A&M.
Now, don't you ever forget it. And that's why I
stayed in the business. We've had our ups and downs
and mostly downs. But it's been fun. And to me, it's
been rewarding.
So I wouldn't want to. pick out too many shows, but
those in particular, I think that death of a
salesman will eventually rate right up there with
the top stuff that's been produced in America.
That's a wonderful, wonderful show. You
mentioned earlier that at the time you took over
the Aggie Players, there were two courses in the
English department having to do with theater
arts, and you were named as the instructor at those
at that time. To what extent has the theater arts
section grown in the English department? Well,
that's quite a story. The Texas Educational
Theater Association was formed in 1950, and I was a
charter member of that, and eventually I became
president of it, two terms. I've been also
secretary of it and held several other offices in
it. It's an organization that includes all the uh
not all but any of the university and college
people in texas who are interested in promoting
good theater in texas and we have a convention once
a year i'm not going to go into that but that
organization is primarily responsible for
cataloging and making up different curricula
that are now used throughout the colleges in
Texas. And I had quite a hand in that. And that's
where our six basic courses started in that
organization. We had help from all of the members
to make up these courses. And that's where they
show. And of course, acting, scene design,
directing, and playwriting, and so forth and so
on. And we suggested that the colleges adopt
those. And we've got all our syllabi on those
things. And that's how it started. And right now,
we've got 19 courses here that are offered at the
university, accredited. And I'll have to say that
I'm responsible for the general outline of all of
these courses. And when I hired this young fellow,
Wink, a few years ago, I turned over several
courses to him on a technical level, and he's added
and deleted quite a bit in there. So we have quite a
bit of theater work that's offered today in the
catalog. And I changed the thing from English to
theater arts. But after all, most universities,
they call it drama. Now, to me, the word drama means
the play. That's all it means. And if I'm going to
take a script and put it on in a building or out in a
pasture somewhere, that is theater. That's
theater. And so that's why. And then, of course, we
added the word art to it. on general principles. So
that's why I have, I name these courses theater
arts. I don't think there's but one or two schools
in the state that have any titles like that. Most of
them are drama. Drama. And a good many of them are
speech, and that's... Well, many of them have it as
a separate speech and drama department, do they
not? Yes. As opposed to being in the English
department. Oh, yes, yes, yes, sure. Is A&M the
only one that has it in the English department?
Well, I'm not going to say they're the only one, but
I think so. I'm going to say something. I don't know
whether you want to delete this or not. Well, we'll
leave that up to you. I'm going to say this, that for
two years I have had on somebody's desk up there a
complete program whereby A&M can offer a B.A.
degree in theater. And it has been looked at and
looked at favorably by TEA,
and it hasn't happened yet.
I'm not going to say any more now because, not that
it makes any difference to you or me either, but we
have all of the facilities here to offer a degree.
So you didn't get that, I don't know. When you first
took over the Aggie Players in 1950, what facility
did you use for putting on your place? I just got
through telling you, we had a leaky assembly hall.
And I had six great big leak holes. You don't know
what one of those is, but they were about this long,
about this big round. And they were not very good.
That's all we had. You called them what? The six
things you had were called what? Lekos.
L-E-K-O-S. That's a light. Light. Yes, it's a
light. We had no equipment whatsoever. Nothing.
Nothing. Absolutely nothing. We had two or three
cans of dried paint and probably a half a dozen
flats that were old and beat up. We had absolutely
nothing. Nothing. No money, no budget, no
nothing. I'm not complaining. You asked me a
question, and I'm telling you the truth, you see.
That's what I'm asking for. Yeah. Okay, now, to get
the perspective, you used the assembly hall,
which was located approximately where All Faith
Chapel is. That's right. How long did you continue
to use that building? I can't remember, so help me,
Hannah. I can't remember. Okay. For quite a while.
Let's leave it that way. Well, let's say this way.
If you can find out when they tore the thing down or
when it fell down, that's when we moved out and we
had to. Okay. When they tore that building down,
where did you go? Guyon. Guyon. We didn't go to
Guyon, no, permanently, though we fiddled
around. We were in the basement of the MSC, and we
were, you know, We were without a home, to tell you
the truth. You see, at that time, they were still
giving movies in Guyon Hall, beginning in the
afternoon and running all afternoon and up into
the night. This was a daily occurrence? Oh, yes.
Yes, every day. Every day. So we didn't have, we had
the basement. Eventually we had the basement.
Then when they stopped giving movies over there,
which date I don't remember, I was asked to take
over the supervision, let's say, of Guyon Hall. So
I did. And that became the home of the Aggie
Players. And then we... created a fallout
theater. And that was a theater whereby any
student on this campus could write a play or could
do a play in the basement for the public. And we'd
give him any equipment that he needed. I mean, this
was open anyway. We called it the fallout theater.
And you see those little black books here? Those
are all scripts of fallout theater productions
done absolutely by students. No, they weren't all
written by students. Some of them were. But they
were directed, and the light plots, the acting,
and everything else was done by students. With a
little help from us, if they wanted a little help,
we'd go in and help them out a little. And that's
what the fallout theater was. Is that still in the
business? Yes, but we don't really have a fallout
shelter for them to operate in. We've done a few
plays over at Forum there that we claim are fallout
theater, but I don't like to... I didn't want to
lose the name of the fallout theater. You see, we
have the Aggie plays, we have the fallout theater,
we have Children's Creative Dramatics, we have
Children's Theater, and we have...
the premium players. We have those five groups
working within the structure of the theater arts
section of the Department of English. And they've
all been quite successful over the last few years.
See, we run this Children's Creative Dramatics
and the premium players in the summer. The
Children's Creative Dramatics is run for the
community of College Station. That's right, yes.
I'm somewhat familiar with that because both of my
sons participated briefly. Yes. But that is done
by students primarily? No, no, no. I hire people to
do that that have been trained by me or us in the area
of Children's Trade in the Mass. I teach
Children's Trade in the Mass. You teach it on
campus? Yes. And then students who have been in
that Well, they've got to have more than that
before I'll hire them. Well, I mean, they have been
in that. Oh, yes, yes. And then you hired them for
the summer to... The lady that's been working
downtown is... Been working down there, I don't
know, five or six years, the same lady down there.
And that's where the creating dramatics is for a
specific age group, which goes up to what? Five to
ten. Five to ten. Well, five to eleven, but we don't
get many of those eleven, twelve-year-olds. And
then the premier players are for older. Teeners
from thirteen on, in high school, the high school
kiddos, you see. And we do two plays a summer with
them. Two full-length plays. And it's really a...
I don't like the word workshop, but it's really a
workshop in theater for teenagers here in the
community. And who... is in charge of the premier
players. Well, I've had my assistant in charge of
the premier players the last several years, ever
since I hired him, Bob Wink. And I believe one of
your premier players productions is usually a
melodrama. Yeah. Well, the last three or four
years, yeah, we use a melodrama. Because they're
fun, and it's a summertime type of production.
Yeah. Yeah.
What was the financial footing, financial basis,
let's say, for the Aggie players when you took
over? I just got through telling you. Well, we
didn't get anything. Nothing. I believe you said
before we turned on the tape they were in a $600 in
debt. That's right. And they were in a student
activity then, and I just went to the head fellow
there who was Spike White, a nice guy, and I said,
Spike, I'm not going to dig around for this $600. He
said, all right, we'll just wipe it off. Tabula
rasa. So he wiped it off and I started with nothing.
So you had no money. No money. No equipment other
than six flights. Yeah. And so you had to then, I
suppose, do a good bit of scrounging at first. That
is a beautiful word, and we've been doing it for 25
years. Did you get any amount of money from the
student services? Yes. Eventually, we got some
money from the exchange store profit.
They looked very favorably upon us, and they gave
us, for quite a while, they gave us quite a bit of
money. And then when we became a little bit more
affluent, or not affluent, but a little more
self-supporting, they sort of came down, down,
down, down, which they should have. They were
perfectly right in cutting their allowance to us.
But that's the only one. Just recently, in the last
three years, three or four years maybe, we have a
small budget in the Department of English. And
incidentally, there was a gentleman out in West
Texas who has, for the last five years, been
sending me, as a personal thing, I think, because
his daughter was my secretary once, And he's a
fairly affluent old gentleman. He even sent me
$500 every year. And I've been using that for the
premium players and the children's career
dramatics. And I've been getting some money from
the last several years. When I say I, I mean we.
We've been getting some money in the last several
years from the College Station Recreation
Council. That would be for the premier players.
And the children. Yes, right.